<div class="title-card">
    <h1>Linting</h1>
</div>

---

# We have already used a linting tool

*Can you think of it?*

---

# Answer: ShellCheck

*What did it do?*

<details> 
  <summary>The command</summary>

        $ shellcheck run_forever.sh 
</details>


---

# Why lint?

Linters perform static analysis on the code without executing it.

> Linters are a [static code analysis tool used to flag programming errors, bugs, stylistic errors and suspicious constructs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lint_%28software%29).


Discuss in pairs: *Give some reasons for why you should lint your code. What type of problems can you lint for?*


---

# What can you lint for?

**Error Detection**: Identifies programming errors, such as syntax errors or type mismatches.

**Code Quality and Consistency**: Checks for adherence to coding standards and conventions, ensuring consistency across the codebase.

**Improving Readability**: Helps in formatting code in a readable and maintainable way.

**Finding Potential Bugs**: Detects code patterns that are likely to be errors or could lead to bugs in the future.

**Security**: Identifies security vulnerabilities and insecure coding practices.

**Performance**: Identifies code that could be optimized for better performance.

---

# Popular linters

| Programming Language | Popular Linters                 |
|----------------------|---------------------------------|
| JavaScript           | ESLint, JSHint, JSLint, Standard|
| Python               | Pylint, flake8, Pyflakes, Black |
| Java                 | Checkstyle, PMD, FindBugs       |
| C/C++                | Clang-Tidy, CPPLint, GCC        |
| Ruby                 | RuboCop, Reek                   |
| PHP                  | PHP_CodeSniffer, PHPMD          |
| CSS                  | Stylelint, CSSLint              |
| TypeScript           | TSLint, ESLint                  |
| Go                   | Golint, Gofmt, Go Vet           |
| Swift                | SwiftLint                       |
| Kotlin               | Ktlint, Detekt                  |
| Rust                 | Clippy                          |




---

# When and where to lint?

**Locally before pushing to version control.**

vs.

**CI/CD pipelines.** 

*Let's do some hands-on first and consider the pros and cons of each.*

---


<div class="title-card">
    <h1>Standard and Git hooks - Hands-on</h1>
</div>


---

# Let's lint a Node.js project using standard

1. Let's create a **new** local repository.

2. Write a javascript file with intentional style errors.

Example:

```javascript
const a = 123;
 let b = "abc"

console.log(b)
```

*Can you spot the style errors?*

*Can you spot the code smell that a linter can't spot?*

Now we are ready to lint!

---

# Linting with `Standard`

Create a Javscript file with some intentional errors.

You can run [Standard](https://www.npmjs.com/package/standard#is-there-a-git-pre-commit-hook) in the project to lint the code

```bash
$ npx standard
```

Or to fix it:

```bash
$ npx standard --fix
```

We don't want to run --fix in the CI pipeline since it modifies code and the code in the CI pipeline should not update the code in version control.

---

# Git Hooks

It is in the DevOps mindset to try to catch problems as early as possible.

We can disallow developers from pushing if their code isn't up to standard. 

* (-) Downside: Git Hooks must be manually configured on every machine. There is no way to push them into version control. 

---

# Git Hooks - Our first hook

Let's first try to create a `hello world` git hook.

First initialize a git repository. 

In the `.git/hooks` folder, create a file called `pre-commit`. You can copy the sample for inspiration (assuming you are in the hooks folder):

```bash
$ mv pre-commit.sample pre-commit
```

Add an echo statement to the file:

```bash
$ echo "Hello, world!" > pre-commit
```

Now try to commit and see the result. 

---

# Git Hooks - Adding `Standard` to a hook (*nix and Git Bash)

In the `pre-commit` file replace the content with the following. 

https://www.npmjs.com/package/standard#is-there-a-git-pre-commit-hook

It requires you to have Standard installed. The above script will work if you install it globally:

```bash
$ npm install -g standard
```

Or you could modify the script to use the `npx` command:

```bash
xargs_r -E '' -t npx standard
```


You could also install it locally in the project with (`npm install standard`) and modify the script like this:

```bash
xargs_r -E '' -t ./node_modules/.bin/standard
```

---

# Git Hooks - Adding `Standard` to a hook (Powershell)

```powershell
# Ensure all JavaScript files staged for commit pass standard code style
function xargs-r {
    param (
        [ScriptBlock]$Command
    )

    $paths = git diff --name-only --cached --relative | Select-String -Pattern '\.jsx?$' | ForEach-Object { $_.Line }

    if ($paths) {
        $paths | ForEach-Object {
            &$Command $_
        }
    }
}

$xargsCommand = { param ($path) standard $path }

xargs-r $xargsCommand

if ($LASTEXITCODE -ne 0) {
    Write-Host 'JavaScript Standard Style errors were detected. Aborting commit.'
    exit 1
}
```

---

# Libraries for Git Hooks

**Tip**: Libaries exist to manage and install git hooks.

1. https://pre-commit.com/

2. https://typicode.github.io/husky/

---

# devenv.sh

https://devenv.sh/

Built-in support for adding Git Hooks to your project.

---

# Git hooks pros and cons?

*Let's discuss*

---

# Git hooks pros and cons

**Pros**

  - Early Error Detection / Immediate Feedback

  - Prevents bad commits from being checked in to version control

**Cons**

  - Local Only

  - Manual Configuration

  - Bypassable (with the `--no-verify` flag)

  - Cross-Platform Issues (bash scripts could cause problems on Windows)


---

<div class="title-card">
    <h1>Linting in Github Actions</h1>
</div>

---

# sonarlint

IDE extension for linting in real-time.

https://www.sonarsource.com/products/sonarlint/

Works with various IDEs.

---

# CI - Linting example in lint.yaml

This is to give you an idea of how to set up a linter in a CI pipeline.

Look into other linters for Node.js such as ESLint and JSHint.

The previous slides use Standard because it requires no configuration.

```yaml
lint:
  name: 'Run linter'
  runs-on: ubuntu-latest
  defaults:
    run:
      shell: bash
  steps:
    - uses: actions/checkout@v2
      name: 'Checkout repository'
    - name: 'Set up Node.js'
      uses: actions/setup-node@v3
      with:
        node-version: '18'
    - name: 'Install Dependencies'
      run: npm install
    - name: 'Run Linter'
      run: npx standard -v
```

*Why doesn't it make sense to run `--fix` in GitHub Actions?*

---

# hadolint

Once we start working with Docker, we can use [hadolint](https://github.com/hadolint/hadolint) to lint our Dockerfiles.

---

# SuperLinter and MegaLinter

https://github.com/marketplace/actions/super-linter

https://github.com/oxsecurity/megalinter

---

# Break things, let the linter catch you

Focusing on software quality should not make you risk averse. The point of tools like linters is to allow us to fail.

If you only open PRs that do not break anything, then you are not moving fast enough.

And if you break something, then use it as an opportunity to set up tools to prevent it from happening again.

